Can the International Court of
Justice stop the war in Gaza?
The UN's top court will hear South Africa's
genocide case against Israel on January 11th.
The initial hearing will likely focus on
South Africa arguing for an interim order
asking Israel to "immediately suspend its
military operations in and against Gaza."
We asked three legal experts about the arguments
and what to expect in the coming weeks.
Their main argument is that Israel is
committing genocide and is also failing
to prevent genocide and also to prevent
the incitement to genocide. And that is
based on article nine of the Genocide
Convention, which gives jurisdiction to
the International Court of Justice.
In its 84-page long application,
South Africa has provided details as to why
Israel's actions and omissions are genocidal
in character because they're intended to
bring about the destruction of substantial
part of the Palestinian national, racial and
ethnic group that is living in the Gaza Strip.
Israel has rejected these allegations
and called the South African case "a
despicable and contemptuous exploitation"
of the ICJ. It also accused South Africa
of "giving political and legal cover"
to the Oct. 7 terror attacks by Hamas.
Israel says it's doing everything it can to
avoid harming civilians – while
Hamas uses them as human shields.
So this is not like a criminal case or where
it's required proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
This is more like a higher risk probability
of genocide being committed or impending. And
South Africa has detailed the wrongful conduct
by Israeli authorities, and the genocidal intent.
They have drawn from UN and other expert
reports as well as talking about the risk
or the occurrence of genocide. They have looked
at the extensive destruction of Gaza. They have
looked at the extensive killing of Palestinians
that has taken place, including predominantly
civilians, including, as we know, many,
many children that have been killed.
And the genocidal intent can be
inferred both through the pattern
of conduct of Israeli authorities, the
actions of the IDF in the Gaza Strip,
but also through statements that have been issued
by senior Israeli officials. And South Africa has
provided a long list with examples of such
inflammatory and dehumanizing statements,
including by the Israeli prime minister,
the president, Ministry of Defense.
And some of these statements
are open to interpretations
that are consistent with genocidal intent.
It's still, however, will be, I think, difficult
for South Africa to prove that these statements
were actually translated into, uh, policy.
Especially since there have been also many other
statements by many officials, including the some
of the same officials, which I have mentioned,
the highest leadership of government and
the IDF, that actually strongly rejected
the insinuation that Israel is targeting, for
instance, Palestinian civilians, and have been
maintained that Israel is conducting its war
campaign within the confines of international law.
There is a distinction in what the ICJ and the
ICC [International Criminal Court] do.
The ICJ deals with state responsibility.
The ICC deals with individual criminal
responsibility. Their procedures are also
separate. They operate separately. There
are two independent international courts.
The ICC is already looking at,
uh, a host of allegations, uh,
relating to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
In fact, going back all the way to 2014. The
ICC prosecutor has already been to Israel
and to the Palestinian territories. Uh,
and he and his team are looking into
that. I believe that for South Africa,
there was an interest to, uh,
in a way, expedite the process.
Only the question of provisional measures, uh,
would be discussed. The court would have to
ascertain a, that it does have on its face,
jurisdiction to hear the case that the
claims made by South Africa are plausible.
This is not the merits phase. The merits,
which is where the court if it gets that far,
would decide on whether or not Israel has
breached its obligations under the Genocide
Convention. So this case is not there yet. It's
nowhere near that. And so the provisional measures
that they [South Africa] have requested are
essentially around the idea of Israel suspending
military operations in and against Gaza.
The facts on the ground and the statements
by senior Israeli officials are damning enough for
[this] stage of the proceedings. And most likely
the court will indicate the provisional measures
along the lines requested by South Africa.
So if a provisional measures order is issued
from the ICJ, then all of the other state
parties to the Genocide Convention should be as
part of their obligations under that Convention,
pressuring Israel to comply with
that provisional measures order.
In some cases, the court simply reiterated
the legal obligations of the parties, namely,
reminded the parties of their obligation not
to commit genocide. Since Israel is maintaining
that it is not practicing genocide, it would be
rather relatively straightforward for Israel to
comply with a measure if it is formulated in that
sense. But there has been another genocide case
in Russia versus, uh, Ukraine, sorry, versus
Russia, that was adjudicated last year, where
the court had ordered Russia to stop the war in
Ukraine. And there we have seen Russia effectively
refuse to comply with, uh, those provisional
measures. So, if the court would order Israel,
for instance, to stop its military campaign
in Gaza, I would imagine that we will see a
reaction that is probably closer to the reaction
that we have seen from Russia in that regard.